 Most of the pulp stones found were true pulp stones, suggesting that advanced age is more closely associated with false pulp stones due to greater exposure to inductive irritants in the pulp tissue over time, most likely trauma. True and free pulp stones were found in large numbers in teeth that did not complete root development, whereas embedded and adherent true pulp stones were found in teeth with full root development.

Association with systemic illnesses

In addition to the debate surrounding the role of age in pulp stone formation, there is also a possible association between pulp stones and systemic illnesses. While this has not been rigorously studied, previous research by Stafne and Szabo in 1933 found a correlation between pulp stones and arteriosclerosis, osteitis deformans, and acromegaly. However, they did not find any link between pulp stones and other illnesses such as cholelithiasis, renal lithiasis, gout, hypercementosis, migraine, and torus linguae/palatinus.

Overall, while there is still much to be learned about the formation and association of pulp stones, these studies provide valuable insights into the factors that may contribute to their development. Further research is needed to fully understand the mechanisms behind their formation and potential links to systemic illnesses.

A study conducted by Edds et al. (2005) found that there was a significant increase in the prevalence of pulp stones in patients diagnosed with cardiovascular disease compared to those who were healthy. The study discovered that individuals with cardiovascular disease were more likely to develop pulp stones, which are small, hard masses of mineralized tissue that form in the dental pulp. This finding suggests that there may be a correlation between cardiovascular disease and dental health, which warrants further investigation.

In addition to cardiovascular disease, there are other tentative correlations between diseases and illnesses and an increased prevalence of pulp stones. However, there is currently no proof of causation. Late-stage renal failure, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Calcinosis universalis, tumoral calcinosis, and Marfan syndrome are some of the diseases and illnesses that are thought to be associated with a greater prevalence of pulp stones. Van der Woude's syndrome is also believed to be related to pulp stones.

Interestingly, there appears to be a particular connection between the presence of pulp stones and renal issues. Studies have shown a correlation between pulp stones and renal stones, with individuals who have three or more teeth containing pulp stones being 5.78 times more likely to have renal stones compared to those who have pulp stones in fewer than three of their teeth. This finding suggests that there may be a link between the formation of pulp stones and the development of renal stones.

Similarly, Kaswan et al. (2014) explored a potential correlation between pulp stones and stones in salivary glands. The study found that individuals with a large number of pulp stones were likely to have a large number of stones embedded in their salivary glands. This finding suggests that there may be a relationship between the formation of pulp stones and the development of salivary gland stones.

Overall, these findings suggest that there may be a connection between dental health and certain diseases and illnesses.