 The study found that first molars that had received restorative treatment or were currently suffering from caries were more likely to have pulp stones than healthy, intact, and unrestored molars. The majority of these pulp stones were found to be false, which supports the idea that chronic pulp irritation is a major factor in their formation.

Another study conducted in Australia by Ranjitkar et al. found that teeth that had received restorative treatment and/or were carious had a much higher frequency of pulp stones compared to healthy and intact teeth. The study found that 41.7% of restored and/or carious teeth contained pulp stones, as opposed to 28.8% of healthy teeth containing pulp stones.

Overall, these studies suggest that chronic pulp irritation is a significant factor in the formation of false pulp stones. This highlights the importance of proper dental care and the prevention of caries and other forms of dental trauma in order to maintain healthy pulp tissue in teeth.

Pulp stones have been a topic of interest in dental research for many years. Several studies have investigated the correlation between pulp stones and the health status of the dental crown, with varying results. Some studies have suggested that there is a link between the presence of pulp stones and dental caries, while others have found no correlation.

Tamse et al. (1982) conducted a study in which they found no correlation between the presence of pulp stones and the health status of the dental crown. They examined teeth with healthy and intact crowns, carious crowns, and crowns with restorative treatment. However, it is important to note that this study was conducted over three decades ago, and newer research may have different findings.

Subay et al. (2001) investigated the link between extrusion and pulp stone formation. They found no correlation between extrusion and pulp stone formation in a study involving 40 teeth from different patients, which were extracted within 10-40 days after being extruded with a force of 75 g. However, it is possible that the time period between extrusion and extraction was insufficient in this study, leading to the formation of pulp stones.

Local irritants are thought to be the most important causes of irritation that lead to the formation of pulp stones. Dental caries is the most significant irritant, but other irritants include periodontal disease, trauma, healed tooth fractures, and various dental treatments. These treatments include tooth transplantation, pulp-capping procedures, and tooth injury restorations, which have all been linked to the formation of pulp stones.

Prevalence of pulp stones, distribution in population, and distribution by gender

The average prevalence of pulp stones is approximately 8-9% worldwide, although some studies have reported a prevalence as high as 50% in surveyed samples. Patil et al. (2018) conducted a study on the prevalence of pulp stones and found that they are present in a significant portion of the population. The distribution of pulp stones also varies by gender, with some studies reporting a higher prevalence in females.

In conclusion, pulp stones are a common occurrence in the dental population, and their formation can be linked to various local irritants. While the correlation between pulp stones and dental health is still being studied, it is clear that they can have an impact on dental treatments and procedures.